### OverviewThis paper investigates resilience and adaptability in self-evidencing systems, framing these concepts within the free energy principle and vice versa. The authors argue that self-organisation under this principle is fundamentally about resilience, defined as the condition under which things exist at all. In previous work, this has been investigated as modelling resilience using the free energy principle. They will extend that work by making the case that identity is a constant process of self-reconfiguration, implying the existence of a self-model and the energy to reconfigure that self-model—and hence, the resilience of a maintained identity under changes. A general framework for thinking about resilience in this context will be sketched out, and some models will be provided using that framework.### MethodologyThe authors’ approach is primarily theoretical, developing a formal framework for understanding resilience within the context of the free energy principle. They begin by stating that “self-organisation is implicitly defined in terms of identity—that is, the self.” However, it is also apparent that “self-organisation is never static, and the sense of identity implicit here must somehow be flexible or else be capable of accommodating changes in the environment.” In dissipative adaptation, for example, a system self-organises by restructuring itself to absorb and dissipate energy from an external source in the environment [9,21,24,40]. This echoes enactive and autopoietic theories: living systems produce and maintain themselves [28], and for an organism to maintain a model of itself and its environment, it must produce what is required to preserve its generative model [29]. Maturana–Varela’s concept of autopoiesis describes how a system continuously regenerates its components but also keeps its identity intact—again encountering the tension we highlighted. This paper aims to investigate what an appropriate description of this flexibility might be and how can it can be modelled, and in particular, what resilience has to do with a changing identity in dynamic environments. They will develop a first idea of a formalism to describe resilience and some simple models for how resilience features in adaptive systems.Adaptation is often achieved by, or can be modelled as, an inference process [15,37,39,47,51]. An interesting example to study is the human brain. Modern theoretical neuroscience asserts that the brain maintains an internal self-model which is continuously refined as part of its predictive engagement with the world. In predictive processing, an agent must model the causes of its sensory input to respond to perturbations from the environment [12]. Since the agent’s own body, traits, and actions are implicated in those causes, the brain encodes a model of ‘self’ to better predict incoming sensations [20]. In particular, Hohwy–Michael suggest that people “perceive and maintain their selfhood by an internal model of hierarchical endogenous (hidden) causes”, wherein higher-level causes like goals and traits generate predictions that shape perception and action. It follows that identity is embodied in the brain’s generative model and is continuously updated by maximising model evidence and minimising prediction error, a process one might call self-evidencing.As discussed, maintaining an identity requires not just change but also a degree of stability of core features, offering a conundrum. To self-evidence, an agent learns and constantly adjusts a generative model of the world and of itself, using sensory evidence to correct discrepancies. The brain expends informational and energetic resources to keep its self-model aligned with reality—revising beliefs or deploying actions when mismatches (prediction errors) arise. This continual updating is the computational essence of self-reconfiguration. The self-model is never static, because new experiences demand incorporation.One way to resolve this tension is to view an agent as balancing accuracy (updating to fit data) with precision or confidence in prior beliefs, as is done in active inference [14,33]. Some self-model predictions—e.g. deeply held traits or values—are high-precision priors that resist change, providing continuity of identity. This balance is evident in psychology: people seek to preserve a coherent self-concept in the face of discrepant information (the motive for self-consistency or self-verification) even as they update other aspects of themselves over time [34]. For example, individuals continuously gather self-relevant information to build an inner ‘self-theory’, updating beliefs about themselves with feedback from social and personal experiences. Over time, as a more stable self-concept is consolidated, people begin to give greater weight to maintaining existing self-beliefs, “at the expense of continuous updating”.Altogether this implies that the “self” is not a static essence but a working model, continually regenerated by the very organism it defines. To characterise the malleability of certain aspects of identity and the rigidity of certain other ones, we will frame it in terms of resilience. An identity (the organism’s self-model) is sustained by ongoing self-production and error-correction—the same processes that characterise resilience. Resilience generally refers to the capacity of a system to withstand shocks or disturbances without losing its core functions or identity [18,33,42].Resilience and adaptability in self-evidencing systems3The term resilience is polysemous: it encompasses at least three complementary aspects [2,33]. It denotes (i) inertia—resistance to change when disturbed, (ii) elasticity—the ability to rebound or restore a prior state after a deviation, and (iii) plasticity—the capacity to flexibly reorganise or find new stable states when conditions change. All three aspects describe processes rather than static traits. Resilience is not simply a fixed quantity one has a certain amount of; it is something one does, dynamically, over time.The link between identity processes and resilience becomes apparent when we consider what is maintaining or recovering in each case. In the face of life’s perturbations—be it trauma, loss, illness, or rapid change—it is often one’s sense of self and purpose that is challenged. Awareness and cognitive flexibility distinguish the more resilient phenotypes, allowing agents to anticipate and integrate surprises without being overwhelmed. A resilient individual manages to hold onto an integrated self-concept (core values, sense of meaning, self-esteem) or to reconstruct a new one, such that they continue to function and grow. This points to multiple scales of the self, akin to Russian dolls with varying degrees of malleability—or rates of change.Identity has been linked in different ways to resilience. the concepts have porosity in the literature and a degree of metaphorical artistic license. Empirical studies show clear connections between certain qualities of identity and resilience outcomes. For instance, people who have more complex identities—i.e. who see themselves in terms of multiple distinct roles or attributes—tend to be more resilient to stress and negative events [4,49]. If one facet of the self is threatened, a person with many facets can draw strength and continue to find self-worth in other aspects, preventing a total collapse of self-regard. This flexibility in self-concept, a form of adaptive reconfiguration of identity, is a protective factor.Similarly, having a coherent but adaptable narrative identity (a life story that makes meaning of difficulties) is associated with resilience [17,25]. Individuals who can ‘re-story’ their lives after trauma, incorporating the adversity into their identity as a survivor or as someone who has grown, often show better recovery and even post-traumatic growth [32]. Conversely, a brittle and rigid identity will lead an individual to not be able to recover from any major disruption.Ultimately, it is the degree of continuity of identity which is paramount. Breakwell(2021) introduced the notion of identity resilience within identity processes theory, defining it as “a relatively stable self-schema based on self-esteem, self-efficacy, positive distinctiveness and continuity” that helps one cope with threat [3]. In this sense, resilience can be seen as the successful management of identity threats: maintaining core identity integrity whilst adapting aspects that need to change.Given the above, we can argue that the process of identity formation and reconfiguration is inherently a resilience process.In that context, a resilient response corrects a disturbance or accommodates it by updating the self-model. This corresponds to elasticity and plasticity, with resilient elasticity being an agent’s natural return to its characteristic states (e.g. attractors) after a shock, and resilient plasticity being the possession of degenerate solutions—that is, multiple ways to achieve well-being, or allowing flexible reorganisation.Resilientadaptationcanbeseenasanongoingnegotiationofidentity.Theindividualorsystemmustdecidewhattoholdontoandwhattochangeinresponsetoperturbation.Maintainingfunctionalintegritymightmeanpreservingcertaincore self-aspects (values, roles) constant (inertia), while adaptive reorganisation might mean transforming other aspects (adopting a new identity, goal, or belief system) to accommodate new realities (plasticity).2 A basic mathematical formalismWe can think of a system’s identity configuration or psychological state as a point in a high-dimensional state space. Overtime, as the system goes through typical experiences, their state traces out a trajectory—essentially their equilibrium or habitual behaviour. Resilience relates to what happens when the system is pushed off this usual trajectory.Certain configurations of the self may be stable attractors (basins of attraction) representing a well-integrated identity or mode of functioning. Perturbations might nudge the system within the basin (from which it can return to the attractor, recovery) or, if strong enough, knock the system into a different basin (a qualitative shift in identity or functioning). This is analogous to how ecosystems have multiple stable states