### OverviewThis paper investigates the application of quantum formalism to cognitive psychology, proposing a model where the state of mind concerning a range of choices to be made can effectively be modelled in terms of an element of a high-dimensional Hilbert space. The dynamics of the state of mind resulting from information acquisition is characterised by the von Neumann-Lu¨ders projection postulate of quantum theory, which is shown to give rise to an uncertainty-minimising dynamical behaviour equivalent to the Bayesian updating, hence providing an alternative approach to characterising the dynamics of cognitive state that is consistent with the free energy principle in brain science. The quantum formalism however goes beyond the range of applicability of classical reasoning in explaining cognitive behaviours, thus opens up new and intriguing possibilities.### MethodologyThe authors’ methodology centres on representing cognitive states as vectors in a Hilbert space. They argue that this representation is consistent with the principles of quantum mechanics, specifically the projection postulate. The key idea is that the acquisition of information, which is central to cognitive processes, is modelled by the projection postulate. The authors emphasise that this approach does not require the assumption of any specific quantum mechanical effects, such as interference, violation of the Bell inequality, or the use of complex numbers. They will show that these effects are intrinsically quantum-mechanical effects in any probabilistic system modelled on a Hilbert space — an idea that dates back to the pioneering work of Rao [7]. At any rate, their purpose here is to illustrate how it is both natural and effective to implement Hilbert space techniques in modelling human behaviours. Such a proposal, in itself, is not new (see, e.g., [8,9] and references cited therein). Their main contribution is to introduce a formalism that allows for a systematic treatment of the dynamics of cognitive state of mind, from which predictions can be made. The key idea to be explored is that the state of mind of a person, to be defined more precisely, can efficiently be represented in terms of a vector in a high-dimensional Hilbert space, which in turn is a tensor product of lower-dimensional Hilbert spaces. Before turning to technical discussion, they would like to illustrate the significance of the superposition principle in this context through simple examples. The first concerns the tossing of a fair coin. When a coin is tossed, but the outcome not yet revealed, no one will dispute the state of the coin, which is a macroscopic classical object: it is either in the ‘head’ state or in the ‘tail’ state. In fact, even before the coin is tossed, it will be known to all that the state of the coin will be either head or tail. However, a person who is in the position to guess the outcome is having a different state of mind. Until the moment when a choice is made, the person’s mind is in the state of neither head nor tail – it is in a state of a superposition. Thus there is a dissonance between the objective reality of the state of the coin and the state of the mind attempting to determine the state of the coin.Another example is seen in children’s hand game of rock, scissors and paper. Again, until the last moment when the decision is made as to which hand to choose, the person’s mind is in the state of a superposition between the three alternatives. Of course, with any decision, a person may come with a predetermined outcome — as in Groucho Marx’s whatever it is, I’m against it! But until when that decision is made, the fact remains that the mind is in an indefinite state. Only at the moment when the decision is made, for example to declare that the outcome of the coin tossing is head, or choosing the scissors hand, the state ‘collapses’ into one of the definite states. This situation is very much analogous to the measurement process in quantum theory.With these heuristics in mind, the present paper will be organised as follows. I begin by defining what I mean by the state of mind, which essentially will be a Hilbert-space representation of the probability assignment to the totality of choices available to the person. A given set of choices will then be modelled as an observable acting on this Hilbertspace. The idea I put forward is closely related to the proposal made by Busemeyer and his collaborators [10], and that by Khrennikov and his collaborators [11]. One difference to the latter, however, is that I model cognitive behaviours directly using the quantum formalism, rather than starting from the quantum theory and then deduce implications in behavioural modelling by reduction. As a consequence, I am able to gain certain insights into human behaviour that go beyond what is commonly understood in cognitive psychology. I examine how the state of mind changes when a person acquires noisy information that is relevant to decision making. My approach will be consistent with the cybernetics framework of Wiener as an attempt to understand the dynamics of living systems [12]. I will use the von Neumann-Lu¨ders projection postulate in quantum mechanics to arrive at the change in the state of mind, and show that the result agrees with the classical formulation using the Bayes formula; in agreement with related previous findings [11]. Further, I show that the projection postulate gives rise to a evolution that on average minimises future ‘surprises’, and hence is consistent with the free-energy principle widely adopted in brain science [13]. I then consider what happens when noisy information arrives in continuous time. When the dynamical evolution of the state of mind resulting from a sequential von Neumann-Lu¨ders projection postulate is reduced to a projective Hilbert space, the dynamical equation reveals an important feature, namely, that each state of zero uncertainty, having vanishing Shannon-Wiener entropy, acts as an attractor to the dynamics. The result provides a geometric explanation of certain characteristics of human behaviour seen in psychology literature (such as confirmation bias), which I have previously called the tenacious Bayesian behaviour [14]. The work presented here demonstrates the fact that if a person’s opinion is strongly skewed towards one of the false alternatives, and if all choice observables are commutative, then even if partial information about the truth is revealed and the person behaves rationally in accordance with Bayesian updating, it is very difficult for the person to escape from the initial misconception. In other words, adherences to false narratives commonly observed in today’s society is not due to irrational behaviours. Following the proposal in [8], I then consider what happens if choice observables are not commutative. This is motivated by the observation that many empirical observations concerning cognitive human behaviours cannot be fully described by use of a commuting set of observables. The existence of incompatible observables can be used to rescue a person fallen into a false attractor; a possibility that is unavailable by use of purely classical reasonings.Decision making and the state of mindThroughout the paper I will be concerned with the cognitive process of decision making, which will be a topic distinct from what is known as statistical decision theory, for which there are excellent treatises [15,16]. A decision making occurs when a person is unsure from which alternative to choose; but I will be using the term ‘decision making’ in a broad sense to include a person’s uncertain point of view on a topic, for which there are multiple views, and for which there may not be a need to choose one particular alternative. At any rate, this uncertainty, which is largely due to lack of sufficient information, can be modelled in the form of a set of probabilities that represents the likelihoods of different alternatives being selected. Suppose that a decision needs to be made to choose one out of N alternatives. (The number of alternatives can be infinite, or even uncountable — the formalism extends naturally to these cases, but for simplicity I will consider the finite case here.) At a given moment in time, let p denote the likelihood that the kth alternative is selected. If p =1 k kfor a value of k then the mind is in a definite state in relation to this decision. Hence for a given decision, the set of numbers (p ,p ,...,p ) represents the state of mind in relation to that decision making.Of course, at any moment in time one faces a multitude of decisions, not just one, some of which are intertwined with each other while others are independent. In probability theory, such a situation is modelled by means of a joint probability for the totality of decisions. Alternatively, though equivalent, the situation can be modelled on a Hilbert space by use of the square-root map: p → ψ = p . Clearly, the vector with components {ψ }, in the basis |e (cid:105) = (0,0,0,...,1,0,...,0) with only the kth element nonzero, is an element of an N-dimensional real Hilbert space HN. Thus, in terms of the Dirac notation the state can be expressed in the form of a superposition |ψ(cid:105) = ψ |e (cid:105). If there is a second decision to be made out of M alternatives, then the state of a person’s mind in relation to these two choices is represented by an element of the tensor product HN⊗HM. This tensor product structure arises solely from statistical dependencies of two decisions, when modelled on a Hilbert space.This construction extends for an arbitrary number of decisions to be made. With this in mind, I define the state of mind of a person facing a range of alternatives to consider, at any moment in time, to be an element of the tensor product H =⊗K H , where K is the number of distinct decisions. If two decisions can be made independently, then the component of the state vector belonging to the corresponding subspace of H will be in a product state. Otherwise, a state is entangled. As a simple example, consider a pair of binary decisions, for example,