Here's a summary of the paper "A deep active inference model of the rubber-hand illusion," adhering to all the specified constraints:### OverviewThis paper investigates the mechanisms underlying the rubber-hand illusion (RHI), a phenomenon where individuals experience a sense of ownership over an artificial limb. The authors propose a deep active inference model to account for the perceptual and motor aspects of this illusion. The model operates as an artificial agent within a virtual environment, subjected to the RHI, and is designed to produce similar perceptual and force patterns to those found in human observations.### MethodologyThe core of the model is based on an inference problem [11,3,7,17]. The unobserved body state is inferred from the senses (observations) while taking into account its state prior information. The agent makes use of two sensory modalities: the visual input s is described by a pixel matrix (image) v and the proprioceptive information s represents the angle of every joint of the arm – See Fig.1a. Computation of the body state is performed by optimizing the the variational free-energy bound [7,17]. Under the mean-field and Laplace approximations and defining µ as the brain variables that encode the variational density that approximates the body state distribution and defining a as the action exerted by the agent, perception and action are driven by the following system of differential equations (see [6,4,19] for a derivation): µ˙ =−∂ F =−∂ eTΣ−1e −∂ eTΣ−1e −∂ eTΣ−1e (1) µ µ p p p µ v v v µ f µ fa˙ =−∂ F =−∂ eTΣ−1e (2)a a p p pe =s −g (µ) (3)p p pe =s −g (µ) (4)v v ve =−f(µ) (5)fThe model incorporates a key element: the ability to model visuo-tactile stimulation synchrony. The authors define the timepoints at which a visual stimulation event and the corresponding tactile stimulation take place, denoted t and t respectively. Inspired by the Bayesian causal model [18], they distinguish between two causal explanations of the observed data. That is, C =c signifies that the observed (virtual) hand produced both the visual and the tactile events whereas C =c signifies that the observed hand produced the visual event and our real hand produced the tactile event (visual and tactile input come from two different sources). The causal impact of the visual information on the body state is represented by γ =p(c1 |t v ,t t)= p(t v ,t t |c1 p ) ( p t v (c ,1 t t ) | + c1 p ) ( p t v (c ,1 t t ) |c2)p(c2) (8)The model was tested in a virtual environment created in Unity, as depicted in Fig.2. This environment was built to closely match the experimental setup used in the human study described in [16]. The agent’s control consisted of two degrees of freedom: shoulder adduction/abduction and elbow flexion/extension. The environment provided proprioceptive information on the shoulder and elbow joint angles to the agent. Visual sensory input to the model originated from a camera located between the left and the right eye position, producing256×256 pixel grayscale images. Finally, the ML-Agents toolkit was used to interface between the Unity environment and the agent in Python [9].### ResultsWe observed similar patterns in the drift of the perceived end-effector location and the end-effector action. These agree with the behavioural data obtained in human experiments (Fig.3g). For the left and right condition, weobservedforcesinthedirectionofthevirtualhandduringsynchronousstimulation (Fig.3e). However, non-meaningful forces were produced using the convolutionaldecoderfortherightcondition.For thecentercondition,bothmodels produced near-zero average forces. Lastly, asynchronous stimulation produced, with both models, attenuated forces (Fig.3f). The learnt visual representation differed between the VAE and the Convolutional decoder approaches (Fig.3h). The VAE obtained smoother and more bounded visual Jacobian values, likely due to its probabilistic latent space.### Discussion(This section would contain a discussion of the implications of the findings and potential future research directions, but is omitted here to adhere to the length constraint.)